Dynamic Coastal Processes in Cape Cod ? Deliverable 2
Cape Cod, also known as The Cape, is a renowned place that illustrates an outstanding and beautiful shape of beach. It has narrow and long coast that stretches forward over the blue deep ocean. Since the past, the shape of this place has been changing constantly. The current thickness of the coast, the area of the land, and the shape of the beach are different from those from the past. 
 
The barrier island, which is the land that is separated from the mainland, first had ocean between itself and the mainland. As the time passed, the it slowly moved towards the mainland. By 2007, it was connected to not only the main land but also to other islands. In this situation, the sand migration happened towards the west. This fact tells that the waves move toward the west, pushing and causing the sand migration. Considering in long term, it is possible to predict that the whole island will eventually stick to the mainland because it is constantly shifting to west. However, shift and the sand migration are occurring extremely slowly. The barrier island was first connected to the mainland in 1993 but it was not in 1987, which was six years ago. This means that it takes years for the island to move a certain distance. In 1987, there were more non-vegetated area than the vegetated area in the barrier island. Nevertheless, as the sand migration happened, more vegetated areas formed along the coast of the island. By 2007, the ratio of the vegetated area significantly increased comparing to the ratio of the non-vegetated area.
 
After the storm that happened in 1987, the barrier island in the north was broken into two parts and a spit was formed. The island also became thicker than before. Additionally, in overall, the sea level declined. Some lands that were under the ocean arose and it was clear that the area of the island increased. After the storm that happened in 2007, another barrier islands broke into two parts, creating a spit and a lagoon. However, in contrast with 1987, the area of the land did not change much. No land emerged nor the sea level decreased. The reason why barrier islands had great changes due to storm is that they are located around the main land. Therefore, when storm creates any waves, the waves hit those islands first with greatest impacts. 
 
The landscapes of islands from different years clearly show that the total area of barrier island system changed through time. The islands broke into pieces, some lands arose from the ocean, and some lands sank into the ocean. To calculate the change of the area of the islands, we would need to calculate the initial area of the island and the final area of the island, and find the difference. If the change of the area is identified, the mass balance system of the island would also be explained. It would show how much sand left the island and sank into the ocean and how much sand came up from the sea and joined the island. 
 
It is possible to predict that in the future, the whole barrier island will eventually be connected to the mainland and Cape Cod will have no more barrier islands. Out of the three buildings, building A, building B, and the lighthouse, the building that is most stable from beach erosion is the lighthouse because it is located on the land that had the least changes over the years. That land has been constant in shape and did not get great impacts from storms. Oppositely, the building that is most susceptible to beach erosion is building B. It is because the land where the building B is located had the most changes in shape over the years. This explains that this land has been greatly impacted by waves and storms. 
