Harry Potter was a highly unusual boy in many ways. For
one thing, he hated the summer holidays more than any
other time of year. For another, he really wanted to do his homework
but was forced to do it in secret, in the dead of night. And he
also happened to be a wizard.
It was nearly midnight, and he was lying on his stomach in bed,
the blankets drawn right over his head like a tent, a fl ashlight in
one hand and a large leather-bound book (A History of Magic by
Bathilda Bagshot) propped open against the pillow. Harry moved
the tip of his eagle-feather quill down the page, frowning as he
looked for something that would help him write his essay, ¡°Witch
Burning in the Fourteenth Century Was Completely Pointless ?
discuss.¡±
 e quill paused at the top of a likely-looking paragraph. Harry
pushed his round glasses up the bridge of his nose, moved his fl ashlight
closer to the book, and read:
owl post
01_Owl Post.indd 1 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
2
chapter one
Non-magic people (more commonly known as
Muggles) were particularly afraid of magic in medieval
times, but not very good at recognizing it. On
the rare occasion that they did catch a real witch or
wizard, burning had no eff ect whatsoever.  e witch
or wizard would perform a basic Flame- Freezing
Charm and then pretend to shriek with pain while
enjoying a gentle, tickling sensation. Indeed, Wendelin
the Weird enjoyed being burned so much that
she allowed herself to be caught no less than fortyseven
times in various disguises.
Harry put his quill between his teeth and reached underneath
his pillow for his ink bottle and a roll of parchment. Slowly and
very carefully he unscrewed the ink bottle, dipped his quill into it,
and began to write, pausing every now and then to listen, because
if any of the Dursleys heard the scratching of his quill on their way
to the bathroom, he¡¯d probably fi nd himself locked in the cupboard
under the stairs for the rest of the summer.
 e Dursley family of number four, Privet Drive, was the reason
that Harry never enjoyed his summer holidays. Uncle Vernon,
Aunt Petunia, and their son, Dudley, were Harry¡¯s only living relatives.
 ey were Muggles, and they had a very medieval attitude
toward magic. Harry¡¯s dead parents, who had been a witch and
wizard themselves, were never mentioned under the Dursleys¡¯ roof.
For years, Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon had hoped that if they
kept Harry as downtrodden as possible, they would be able to
squash the magic out of him. To their fury, they had been unsuccessful.
 ese days they lived in terror of anyone fi nding out that
01_Owl Post.indd 2 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
3
owl post
Harry had spent most of the last two years at Hogwarts School of
Witchcraft and Wizardry.  e most they could do, however, was to
lock away Harry¡¯s spellbooks, wand, cauldron, and broomstick
at the start of the summer break, and forbid him to talk to the
neighbors.
 is separation from his spellbooks had been a real problem for
Harry, because his teachers at Hogwarts had given him a lot of holiday
work. One of the essays, a particularly nasty one about shrinking
potions, was for Harry¡¯s least favorite teacher, Professor Snape,
who would be delighted to have an excuse to give Harry detention
for a month. Harry had therefore seized his chance in the fi rst week
of the holidays. While Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley
had gone out into the front garden to admire Uncle Vernon¡¯s new
company car (in very loud voices, so that the rest of the street
would notice it too), Harry had crept downstairs, picked the lock
on the cupboard under the stairs, grabbed some of his books, and
hidden them in his bedroom. As long as he didn¡¯t leave spots of ink
on the sheets, the Dursleys need never know that he was studying
magic by night.
Harry was particularly keen to avoid trouble with his aunt and
uncle at the moment, as they were already in an especially bad
mood with him, all because he¡¯d received a telephone call from a
fellow wizard one week into the school vacation.
Ron Weasley, who was one of Harry¡¯s best friends at Hogwarts,
came from a whole family of wizards.  is meant that he knew a
lot of things Harry didn¡¯t, but had never used a telephone before.
Most unluckily, it had been Uncle Vernon who had answered the
call.
¡°Vernon Dursley speaking.¡±
01_Owl Post.indd 3 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
4
chapter one
Harry, who happened to be in the room at the time, froze as he
heard Ron¡¯s voice answer.
¡°HELLO? HELLO? CAN YOU HEAR ME? I ? WANT ?
TO ? TALK ? TO ? HARRY ? POTTER!¡±
Ron was yelling so loudly that Uncle Vernon jumped and held
the receiver a foot away from his ear, staring at it with an expression
of mingled fury and alarm.
¡°WHO IS THIS?¡± he roared in the direction of the mouthpiece.
¡°WHO ARE YOU?¡±
¡°RON ? WEASLEY!¡± Ron bellowed back, as though he and
Uncle Vernon were speaking from opposite ends of a football fi eld.
¡°I¡¯M ? A ? FRIEND ? OF ? HARRY¡¯S ? FROM ?
SCHOOL ?¡±
Uncle Vernon¡¯s small eyes swiveled around to Harry, who was
rooted to the spot.
¡°THERE IS NO HARRY POTTER HERE!¡± he roared, now
holding the receiver at arm¡¯s length, as though frightened it might
explode. ¡°I DON¡¯T KNOW WHAT SCHOOL YOU¡¯RE TALKING
ABOUT! NEVER CONTACT ME AGAIN! DON¡¯T YOU
COME NEAR MY FAMILY!¡±
And he threw the receiver back onto the telephone as if dropping
a poisonous spider.
 e fi ght that had followed had been one of the worst ever.
¡°HOW DARE YOU GIVE THIS NUMBER TO PEOPLE
LIKE ? PEOPLE LIKE YOU!¡± Uncle Vernon had roared, spraying
Harry with spit.
Ron obviously realized that he¡¯d gotten Harry into trouble,
 because he hadn¡¯t called again. Harry¡¯s other best friend from
01_Owl Post.indd 4 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
5
owl post
 Hogwarts, Her mi one Granger, hadn¡¯t been in touch either. Harry
suspected that Ron had warned Her mi one not to call, which was
a pity, because Her mi one, the cleverest witch in Harry¡¯s year, had
Muggle parents, knew perfectly well how to use a telephone, and
would probably have had enough sense not to say that she went to
Hogwarts.
So Harry had had no word from any of his wizarding friends for
fi ve long weeks, and this summer was turning out to be almost as
bad as the last one.  ere was just one very small improvement ?
after swearing that he wouldn¡¯t use her to send letters to any of his
friends, Harry had been allowed to let his owl, Hedwig, out at
night. Uncle Vernon had given in because of the racket Hedwig
made if she was locked in her cage all the time.
Harry fi nished writing about Wendelin the Weird and paused to
listen again.  e silence in the dark house was broken only by the
distant, grunting snores of his enormous cousin, Dudley. It must be
very late, Harry thought. His eyes were itching with tiredness. Perhaps
he¡¯d fi nish this essay tomorrow night. . . .
He replaced the top of the ink bottle; pulled an old pillowcase
from under his bed; put the fl ashlight, A History of Magic, his essay,
quill, and ink inside it; got out of bed; and hid the lot under a loose
fl oorboard under his bed.  en he stood up, stretched, and checked
the time on the luminous alarm clock on his bedside table.
It was one o¡¯clock in the morning. Harry¡¯s stomach gave a funny
jolt. He had been thirteen years old, without realizing it, for a
whole hour.
Yet another unusual thing about Harry was how little he looked
forward to his birthdays. He had never received a birthday card in
01_Owl Post.indd 5 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
6
chapter one
his life.  e Dursleys had completely ignored his last two birthdays,
and he had no reason to suppose they would remember this one.
Harry walked across the dark room, past Hedwig¡¯s large, empty
cage, to the open window. He leaned on the sill, the cool night air
pleasant on his face after a long time under the blankets. Hedwig
had been absent for two nights now. Harry wasn¡¯t worried about
her: She¡¯d been gone this long before. But he hoped she¡¯d be back
soon ? she was the only living creature in this house who didn¡¯t
fl inch at the sight of him.
Harry, though still rather small and skinny for his age, had
grown a few inches over the last year. His jet-black hair, however,
was just as it always had been ? stubbornly untidy, whatever he
did to it.  e eyes behind his glasses were bright green, and on his
forehead, clearly visible through his hair, was a thin scar, shaped
like a bolt of lightning.
Of all the unusual things about Harry, this scar was the most extraordinary
of all. It was not, as the Dursleys had pretended for ten
years, a souvenir of the car crash that had killed Harry¡¯s parents, because
Lily and James Potter had not died in a car crash.  ey had
been murdered, murdered by the most feared Dark wizard for a
hundred years, Lord Vol de mort. Harry had escaped from the same
attack with nothing more than a scar on his forehead, where Vol demort¡¯s
curse, instead of killing him, had rebounded upon its originator.
Barely alive, Vol de mort had fl ed. . . .
But Harry had come face-to-face with him at Hogwarts. Remembering
their last meeting as he stood at the dark window,
Harry had to admit he was lucky even to have reached his thirteenth
birthday.
He scanned the starry sky for a sign of Hedwig, perhaps soaring
01_Owl Post.indd 6 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
7
owl post
back to him with a dead mouse dangling from her beak, expecting
praise. Gazing absently over the rooftops, it was a few seconds before
Harry realized what he was seeing.
Silhouetted against the golden moon, and growing larger every
moment, was a large, strangely lopsided creature, and it was fl apping
in Harry¡¯s direction. He stood quite still, watching it sink
lower and lower. For a split second he hesitated, his hand on the
window latch, wondering whether to slam it shut. But then the
 bizarre creature soared over one of the street lamps of Privet Drive,
and Harry, realizing what it was, leapt aside.
 rough the window soared three owls, two of them holding up
the third, which appeared to be unconscious.  ey landed with a
soft fl ump on Harry¡¯s bed, and the middle owl, which was large and
gray, keeled right over and lay motionless.  ere was a large package
tied to its legs.
Harry recognized the unconscious owl at once ? his name
was Errol, and he belonged to the Weasley family. Harry dashed
to the bed, untied the cords around Errol¡¯s legs, took off the parcel,
and then carried Errol to Hedwig¡¯s cage. Errol opened one
bleary eye, gave a feeble hoot of thanks, and began to gulp some
water.
Harry turned back to the remaining owls. One of them, the
large snowy female, was his own Hedwig. She, too, was carrying a
parcel and looked extremely pleased with herself. She gave Harry
an aff ectionate nip with her beak as he removed her burden, then
fl ew across the room to join Errol.
Harry didn¡¯t recognize the third owl, a handsome tawny one,
but he knew at once where it had come from, because in addition
to a third package, it was carrying a letter bearing the Hogwarts
01_Owl Post.indd 7 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
8
chapter one
crest. When Harry relieved this owl of its burden, it ruffl ed its
feathers importantly, stretched its wings, and took off through the
window into the night.
Harry sat down on his bed and grabbed Errol¡¯s package, ripped
off the brown paper, and discovered a present wrapped in gold, and
his fi rst-ever birthday card. Fingers trembling slightly, he opened
the envelope. Two pieces of paper fell out ? a letter and a newspaper
clipping.
 e clipping had clearly come out of the wizarding newspaper,
the Daily Prophet, because the people in the black-and-white picture
were moving. Harry picked up the clipping, smoothed it out,
and read:
MINISTRY OF MAGIC EMPLOYEE
SCOOPS GRAND PRIZE
Arthur Weasley, Head of the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts
Offi ce at the Ministry of Magic, has won the
annual Daily Prophet Grand Prize Galleon Draw.
A delighted Mr. Weasley told the Daily Prophet,
¡°We will be spending the gold on a summer holiday
in Egypt, where our eldest son, Bill, works as a
curse breaker for Gringotts Wizarding Bank.¡±
 e Weasley family will be spending a month
in Egypt, returning for the start of the new school
year at Hogwarts, which fi ve of the Weasley children
currently attend.
Harry scanned the moving photograph, and a grin spread across
his face as he saw all nine of the Weasleys waving furiously at him,
01_Owl Post.indd 8 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
9
owl post
standing in front of a large pyramid. Plump little Mrs. Weasley;
tall, balding Mr. Weasley; six sons; and one daughter, all (though
the black-and-white picture didn¡¯t show it) with fl aming-red hair.
Right in the middle of the picture was Ron, tall and gangling, with
his pet rat, Scabbers, on his shoulder and his arm around his little
sister, Ginny.
Harry couldn¡¯t think of anyone who deserved to win a large pile
of gold more than the Weasleys, who were very nice and extremely
poor. He picked up Ron¡¯s letter and unfolded it.
Dear Harry,
Happy birthday!
Look, I¡¯m really sorry about that telephone call. I hope the
Muggles didn¡¯t give you a hard time. I asked Dad, and he
reckons I shouldn¡¯t have shouted.
It¡¯s amazing here in Egypt. Bill¡¯s taken us around all the
tombs and you wouldn¡¯t believe the curses those old Egyp tian
wizards put on them. Mum wouldn¡¯t let Ginny come in
the last one.  ere were all these mutant skeletons in there,
of Muggles who¡¯d broken in and grown extra heads and
stuff .
I couldn¡¯t believe it when Dad won the Daily Prophet
Draw. Seven hundred Galleons! Most of it¡¯s gone on this trip,
but they¡¯re going to buy me a new wand for next year.
Harry remembered only too well the occasion when Ron¡¯s old
wand had snapped. It had happened when the car the two of them
had been fl ying to Hogwarts had crashed into a tree on the school
grounds.
01_Owl Post.indd 9 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
10
chapter one
We¡¯ll be back about a week before term starts and we¡¯ll be
going up to London to get my wand and our new books. Any
chance of meeting you there?
Don¡¯t let the Muggles get you down!
Try and come to London,
P.S. Percy¡¯s Head Boy. He got the letter last week.
Harry glanced back at the photograph. Percy, who was in his seventh
and fi nal year at Hogwarts, was looking particularly smug. He
had pinned his Head Boy badge to the fez perched jauntily on top of
his neat hair, his horn-rimmed glasses fl ashing in the Egyptian sun.
Harry now turned to his present and unwrapped it. Inside was
what looked like a miniature glass spinning top.  ere was another
note from Ron beneath it.
Harry ? this is a Pocket Sneakoscope. If there¡¯s someone
untrustworthy around, it¡¯s supposed to light up and spin. Bill
says it¡¯s rubbish sold for wizard tourists and isn¡¯t reliable,
 because it kept lighting up at dinner last night. But he didn¡¯t
realize Fred and George had put beetles in his soup.
Bye ?
Harry put the Pocket Sneakoscope on his bedside table, where
it stood quite still, balanced on its point, refl ecting the luminous
hands of his clock. He looked at it happily for a few seconds, then
picked up the parcel Hedwig had brought.
01_Owl Post.indd 10 3/11/09 7:33:26 PM
Process Black
11
owl post
Inside this, too, there was a wrapped present, a card, and a letter,
this time from Her mi one.
Dear Harry,
Ron wrote to me and told me about his phone call to your
Uncle Vernon. I do hope you¡¯re all right.
I¡¯m on holiday in France at the moment and I didn¡¯t
know how I was going to send this to you ? what if they¡¯d
opened it at customs? ? but then Hedwig turned up! I
think she wanted to make sure you got something for your
birthday for a change. I bought your present by owl-order;
there was an advertisement in the Daily Prophet (I¡¯ve
been getting it delivered; it¡¯s so good to keep up with what¡¯s
 going on in the wizarding world). Did you see that picture
of Ron and his family a week ago? I bet he¡¯s learning loads.
I¡¯m really jealous ? the ancient Egyp tian wizards were fascinating.
 ere¡¯s some interesting local history of witchcraft here,
too. I¡¯ve rewritten my whole History of Magic essay to include
some of the things I¡¯ve found out. I hope it¡¯s not too long ?
it¡¯s two rolls of parchment more than Professor Binns asked
for.
Ron says he¡¯s going to be in London in the last week of the
holidays. Can you make it? Will your aunt and uncle let you
come? I really hope you can. If not, I¡¯ll see you on the Hogwarts
Express on September fi rst!
Love from
01_Owl Post.indd 11 3/11/09 7:33:27 PM
Process Black
12
chapter one
P.S. Ron says Percy¡¯s Head Boy. I¡¯ll bet Percy¡¯s really pleased.
Ron doesn¡¯t seem too happy about it.
Harry laughed as he put Her mi one¡¯s letter aside and picked up
her present. It was very heavy. Knowing Her mi one, he was sure it
would be a large book full of very diffi cult spells ? but it wasn¡¯t.
His heart gave a huge bound as he ripped back the paper and saw a
sleek black leather case, with silver words stamped across it, reading
Broomstick Servicing Kit.
¡°Wow, Her mi one!¡± Harry whispered, unzipping the case to look
inside.
 ere was a large jar of Fleetwood¡¯s High-Finish Handle Polish,
a pair of gleaming silver Tail-Twig Clippers, a tiny brass compass
to clip on your broom for long journeys, and a Handbook of Do-ItYourself
Broomcare.
Apart from his friends, the thing that Harry missed most about
Hogwarts was Quidditch, the most popular sport in the magical
world ? highly dangerous, very exciting, and played on broomsticks.
Harry happened to be a very good Quidditch player; he had
been the youngest person in a century to be picked for one of the
Hogwarts House teams. One of Harry¡¯s most prized possessions
was his Nimbus Two  ousand racing broom.
Harry put the leather case aside and picked up his last parcel. He
recognized the untidy scrawl on the brown paper at once:  is
was from Hagrid, the Hogwarts gamekeeper. He tore off the top
layer of paper and glimpsed something green and leathery, but before
he could unwrap it properly, the parcel gave a strange quiver,
and whatever was inside it snapped loudly ? as though it had
jaws.
01_Owl Post.indd 12 3/11/09 7:33:27 PM
Process Black
13
owl post
Harry froze. He knew that Hagrid would never send him anything
dangerous on purpose, but then, Hagrid didn¡¯t have a normal
person¡¯s view of what was dangerous. Hagrid had been known to
befriend giant spiders, buy vicious, three-headed dogs from men in
pubs, and sneak illegal dragon eggs into his cabin.
Harry poked the parcel nervously. It snapped loudly again. Harry
reached for the lamp on his bedside table, gripped it fi rmly in one
hand, and raised it over his head, ready to strike.  en he seized the
rest of the wrapping paper in his other hand and pulled.
And out fell ? a book. Harry just had time to register its handsome
green cover, emblazoned with the golden title
e Monster
Book of Monsters, before it fl ipped onto its edge and scuttled sideways
along the bed like some weird crab.
¡°Uh-oh,¡± Harry muttered.
 e book toppled off the bed with a loud clunk and shuffl ed
rapidly across the room. Harry followed it stealthily.  e book was
hiding in the dark space under his desk. Praying that the Dursleys
were still fast asleep, Harry got down on his hands and knees and
reached toward it.
¡°Ouch!¡±
 e book snapped shut on his hand and then fl apped past him,
still scuttling on its covers. Harry scrambled around, threw himself
forward, and managed to fl atten it. Uncle Vernon gave a loud,
sleepy grunt in the room next door.
Hedwig and Errol watched interestedly as Harry clamped the
struggling book tightly in his arms, hurried to his chest of drawers,
and pulled out a belt, which he buckled tightly around it.  e
Monster Book shuddered angrily, but could no longer fl ap and snap,
so Harry threw it down on the bed and reached for Hagrid¡¯s card.
01_Owl Post.indd 13 3/11/09 7:33:27 PM
Process Black
14
chapter one
Dear Harry,
Happy birthday!
Think you might fi nd this useful for next year. Won¡¯t
say no more here. Tell you when I see you.
Hope the Muggles are treating you right.
All the best,
Hagrid
It struck Harry as ominous that Hagrid thought a biting book
would come in useful, but he put Hagrid¡¯s card up next to Ron¡¯s
and Her mi one¡¯s, grinning more broadly than ever. Now there was
only the letter from Hogwarts left.
Noticing that it was rather thicker than usual, Harry slit open
the envelope, pulled out the fi rst page of parchment within, and
read:
Dear Mr. Potter,
Please note that the new school year will begin on September
the fi rst.  e Hogwarts Express will leave from King¡¯s Cross
station, platform nine and three-quarters, at eleven o¡¯clock.
 ird years are permitted to visit the village of Hogsmeade
on certain weekends. Please give the enclosed permission form
to your parent or guardian to sign.
A list of books for next year is enclosed.
Yours sincerely,
Deputy Headmistress
01_Owl Post.indd 14 3/11/09 7:33:27 PM
Process Black
15
owl post
Harry pulled out the Hogsmeade permission form and looked at
it, no longer grinning. It would be wonderful to visit Hogsmeade
on weekends; he knew it was an entirely wizarding village, and he
had never set foot there. But how on earth was he going to persuade
Uncle Vernon or Aunt Petunia to sign the form?
He looked over at the alarm clock. It was now two o¡¯clock in the
morning.
Deciding that he¡¯d worry about the Hogsmeade form when he
woke up, Harry got back into bed and reached up to cross off another
day on the chart he¡¯d made for himself, counting down the
days left until his return to Hogwarts.  en he took off his glasses
and lay down, eyes open, facing his three birthday cards.
Extremely unusual though he was, at that moment Harry Potter
felt just like everyone else ? glad, for the fi rst time in his life, that
it was his birthday.