The last thing I needed after a week of stressful politics was more stress, like the big Christmas dinner ham drama, glazed with dysfunctional Kass family holiday “issues” of my own stupid making.
And I’m now in full ham panic, and it’s all so embarrassing.
“Just tell your readers the truth,” said my editor who went all “Ask Amy” on me. “You’re not doing standing rib of beef for Christmas because your brother didn’t praise your beef as much as you wanted last year, because you’re extremely thin-skinned about your cooking. In a fit, you’ve decided to serve ham, but they want beef. And now you complicated it all by passive-aggressively insulting your sister-in-law with a ham video.”
Yes. It’s all my fault. The family issues. The ham thing. I admit it. And I’ll never tell him anything again.
It’s all true: My brother Peter didn’t effusively praise last year’s Christmas standing rib roast from Casey’s Market to my liking. I cooked it low and slow, a technique taught to me by Chicago pitmaster Gary Wiviott — not to mention the gravy and the veal demi-glace — and there was also my French onion soup that took three days to make. And it was all perfect. Just perfect. I expected high praise. All I heard was the sound of chewing. Pride is evil.
Then, on Thanksgiving, my sister-in-law Georgia served a perfectly fine ham alongside her juicy brined turkey. Yet for some idiotic reason I stupidly emailed her a “How to Cook Ham” video the next day.
Betty wanted to kill me, saying I’d been rude. “No,” Georgia said. “You were just being your usual gracious self, and you can quote me.” Ouch.
Then my brother Nick weighed in with a long-distance burn: “What!? John’s not doing prime rib?!?”
I’m making ham, dammit, and you’ll all going to love it or else! Merry Christmas!
What did you expect, a Hallmark card? This is a real family with warts, and I’m the wart hog this year.
And now I must pull off the perfect ham dinner, with homemade glaze, biscuits, escalloped potatoes, beans, several fine bottles of good wine, and dessert.
Or do I have the sides all wrong? I’ve lost the essential main ingredient: confidence.
I might go with a good local Peer ham. The last time I tried one it was delicious, perfect.
But then I thought, foolishly as is my wont, that there might be other hams out there with a larger wow factor. So, I asked for ham recommendations on Facebook. And immediately, I was overwhelmed with ham info. People telling me to go to Wisconsin, Indiana, Kentucky. Virginia, Tennessee. Telling me to fly to Spain, or go to this Chicago packinghouse or that one.
Or to Elburn or Seward in Illinois.
Several readers told me to call Slagel Family Farm, and I did, but they left me on hold forever — like 15 minutes — and with full ham panic building I just gave up.
There’s just too much ham information out there and I can’t process it all.
“I’ll save you the trouble,” offered reader Kevin Kokaska, renowned in some circles as an expert in fine beverages. “Go to Kentucky, but not for meat, rather a grain-based distillate, golden amber in color. It will change your life. You will have no need for ham after that.”
Kevin, I’d just love to go to Kentucky and drink fine bourbon with Sen. Rand Paul and listen to what he thinks will happen to the Republicans after Trump. But I need ham ideas, man, not booze ideas!
“The best ham for Christmas is prime rib, hands down,” said Tom Jorstad.
Yeah great, Tom, did my brother Nick tell you to write that?
“Ham BALLS!!” said Sandy Prizy. “It’s a recipe from my precious Grams, made from ground ham and ground turkey and people always ask for the recipe!”
Thanks Sandy, I’d love a platter of Gram’s Ham BALLS right now, so please send me the recipe, but I need real ham for Christmas dinner and Ham BALLS won’t do.
My friend and famous Michelin star chef Carrie Nahabedian — who cooked the finest meal I’ve ever eaten in my life at her Chicago restaurant Brindille — said, “Trust me.”
“Contact Joel Lezak and L & L Meats in Chicago. Tell him you want the bone in ham that I always use for family functions. Then, the best ham glaze is from Saveur Magazine, ‘Monty’s Ham.’ Use your own spin. The ham from Joel is so damn good you’ll never think twice about doubting your ham choice,” said Carrie.
But I do doubt myself. I have no confidence in the ham world.
Wiviott, the pitmaster who taught me how to barbecue, said that I would probably be overwhelmed.
“As you are well aware, there is a dizzying array of ham types,” Wiviott wrote. “My suggestion for your Christmas dinner is an uncooked, aged, bone-in country ham from a quality producer, seldom seen North of the Mason Dim Sum Line.”
But that would require unfamiliar techniques involving vinegar, soaking, simmering. And I don’t have time to practice!
My brother Peter just announced to everyone that I should get a large uncooked ham and smoke it in the backyard.
“I will eat it in a house, with a mouse, I will eat it in a box, I will eat it with a fox,” said Peter. “No pressure. No pressure at all.”
Yeah, no pressure, bro.
Ham is a pain in the butt.
