A language is a fundamental component of a society and it is basically impossible to form a community without it. In “How Does Our Language Shape the Way We Think?” the author, Lera Boroditsky, talks about how important a language is in shaping one’s thought. She argues that a language is more than just “a syntactic code or a list of grammar rules” (Boroditsky 147) through numerous experiments. Such idea proves how a language seriously affects the society and leads some people to discuss about one of the downsides of current globalization: the dominance of particular languages. Based on this specific topic, in two articles, “Death by Monoculture” and “The Church of Please and Thank You,” Stephen Pax Leonard and Julie Traves both show concerns toward minority languages that are being dominated by the particular languages. However, Traves also mentions few things that show the positive side of a spread of English throughout the world — efforts that English teachers in non English speaking countries are putting in order to protect the natives’ cultural values and how dominant languages could also be seen as a global bridge that brings the world closer. Positive and negative opinions of these authors and their use of various examples and situations in both articles makes the article more credible and drives the audience to think more deeply about their concerns and hopes in terms of the domination of a language.
The domination of a language is quickly spreading out through the entire world because of the rapid globalization and the society’s ever growing desire for economic growth. In “Death by Monoculture,” Leonard puts his deep concern toward the domination of particular languages by listing out several causing factors: environmental and economical issues. First of all, he grabs the audience’s attention by talking about his personal experience in a remote Arctic community, where he sees the possibility of minority languages being disappeared as the ice melts when climate changes. Then, he moves to more general phenomenon, the domination of particular languages that is happening due to the globalization and the consumerism in contemporary society. 
He argues that “consumerism has now made it to every corner of the world” (Leonard 146) and people who used to be living in places where there were not much technological developments now cannot live without them. This phenomenon is putting a negative impact on minor languages because media is produced only with “the top 50 languages maximum,” and it gets to the point where it forces Greenlandic or Polar Eskimos, who use minor languages, “to send text messages in Danish or English because it is easier” (Leonard 147). He stresses his point by criticizing today’s society, where it forces businesses or other social components to focus only on the economic growth and a profit. Such downside of a globalization and the dominance of particular languages caused by global economy is also discussed in Trave’s article, “The Church of Please and Thank You.” In the beginning of his article, Traves also agrees on the point that the global economy and international businesses are somewhat forcing non English speakers to learn English because it is known as a global language. He states that some of the students are trying to learn English because they believe “that the American way is the way forward, that English is the true language of progress” (Traves 175), but many students from all around the world like Sanghun Cho, Marta Andersson, and Swede Helene Elg are putting concerns toward the domination of the language, English, that is threatening their native languages and their cultural values. Two authors’ agreement on such point is highlighting the possible danger of the globalization and alerts the audience about the consequence of having few languages dictating the entire world nation.
Even though these two authors are agreeing solidly on the negative impact of the globalization, there is a clear difference in these two articles. From beginning to the end, Leonard focuses on alerting the audience about the consequence of the dominance of major languages, but Traves tries to be more neutral in her essay, providing both positive and negative aspects of the dominance of the global language: English. In his essay, Leonard starts his argument by evoking a sense of emergency by connecting the extinctinction of minor cultures and languages to an environmental issue. Then, he moves to criticizing the today’s consumerism in order to, again, alert the audience that people should start caring about this issue, or otherwise they will “lose an orchestra of voices that permeate the mind” (Leonard 148). Throughout his entire essay, he continuously warns his audience by emphasizing the negative impact of the globalization and the dominance of language. However, in contrast to Leonard, Traves concedes on the point that the dominance of particular languages caused by global economy could threaten minor languages and culture, but she also argues that the global language could be seen as “a bridge between cultures, not simply a language that supplants other cultures” (Traves 178). In addition to how such problem is perceived differently and could be interpreted positively, Traves also talks about people’s endless effort to preserve cultural values of foreign cultural values to give a sense of hope to people. She mentions, for example, that many professors are taking courses like the Certificate in the Discipline of Teaching English as an International Language in order to teach English in a way that they do not become cultural colonists. These people emphasize “as David Hill… writes in The Guardian Weekly: ‘... [English teachers in foreign countries] are not to be imperialists then we must help our students to express themselves, not our agenda’” (Traves 178). Having discussed about such a closely related topic in two articles, the authors also use similar persuasive techniques in their writings to make them more credible and relatable.
In both articles, the authors provide numerous examples and situations to make their articles closer and more connectable to the audience. For example, Leonard talks about his personal experience in the region of Arctic community as a hook and uses it to show that minority people are actually in danger of losing their languages and their ways of living. Next, he gives examples of many minority groups such as Polar Eskimos and people from Greenland to show how spread out of “the globalised consumerism” (Leonard 147) and technological developments are actually causing minor groups to use other dominant languages from dominant countries in economic terms. Similar to Leonard, Traves also focuses a lot in gathering information from all around the world and getting quotes from many diverse countries such as Korea, Japan, and China. Colorful experiences of the English professors from various perspectives such as Michelle Szabo in Japan and Ian Martin help the audience to visualize the problem. Because the domination of a language and a culture is closely related to the contemporary society, such vibrant examples from many countries is a big part of both authors’ persuasion technique.
In the core of both articles, Leonard and Traves both agree that languages play important roles in shaping one’s thought, which basically implies that the language is a fundamental and necessary component of society. Both authors use countless real life examples from diverse backgrounds in order to show that the domination of a language is happening globally. However, the clear difference of these two articles exist when Leonard explicitly shows his concern toward the domination of a language leading to the domination of a culture, whereas Traves talks about it in the neutral side of an argument. Positive and negative aspects given by these two authors do not confuse the audience in any ways, but actually help them to reconsider about this social phenomenon in the society and think about globalization in new terms — saving minorities.
